docs: Module 1 and 2 (multiple Sections) (B9lab content updates 1) (#791)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: b9lab-content/3-main-concepts/02-architecture.md

---
title: "A Blockchain App Architecture"
order: 2
description: Architecture of a blockchain application built with Cosmos.
---

# Blockchain App Architecture

## What is Tendermint

> Created in 2014, Tendermint accelerates the development of distinct blockchains by attending to general concerns so that those concerns don’t need to be recreated by developers in each case. You may already be using Tendermint without awareness of this since blockchains including [Hyperledger Burrow](https://hyperledger.github.io/burrow/#/) and [Binance Chain](https://www.binance.org/en/smartChain)  use Tendermint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Created in 2014, Tendermint accelerates the development of distinct blockchains by providing a ready-made networking and consensus solution so that these don’t have to be recreated by developers in each case. You may already be using Tendermint without awareness of this since blockchains including [Hyperledger Burrow](https://hyperledger.github.io/burrow/#/) and [Binance Chain](https://www.binance.org/en/smartChain)  use Tendermint.
```
Vague use of “concerns”.

As you might expect, Tendermint itself is modular and flexible. We will concentrate on the Tendermint Core used in Cosmos.

## Consensus in Tendermint Core and Cosmos

In summary, Tendermint Core is a high-performance, consistent, and secure **consensus** module with strict fork accountability. It relies on Proof-of-Stake (PoS) with delegation and [Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint). Participants signal support for well-behaved, reliable nodes that create and confirm blocks. Users signal support by staking ATOM with the possibility of acquiring a share of network transaction fees but also sharing in the risk of reduced returns or even losses should the node become unreliable.

Network participants are incentivized to stake ATOM in the fittest nodes that they deem most likely to provide a dependable service and to withdraw their support should conditions change. In this way, a Cosmos blockchain is expected to adjust the validator configuration and continue even in adverse conditions.

> In more detail, only the top 100 nodes by staked ATOM, the **validators**, participate in the transaction finalization process. The privilege of creating a block is awarded in proportion to the ATOM tokens committed. For example, if a given validator has 15% of the ATOM staked to the top 100 nodes, then it can expect to receive the block creation privilege 15% of the time. The block is broadcasted to the other validators, who are expected to respond promptly and correctly. They will absorb penalties for failing to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In more detail, only the top 150 nodes by staked ATOM, the **validators**, participate in the transaction finalization process. The privilege of creating a block is awarded in proportion to the voting power a validator has. Voting power is calculated as all ATOM tokens staked by a validator and its delegates. For example, if a given validator's voting power would be 15% of the total voting power of all validators, then it can expect to receive the block creation privilege 15% of the time. The block is broadcasted to the other validators, who are expected to respond promptly and correctly. They will absorb penalties for failing to do so.
```
150 Nodes since this week.

Also, the 15% example isn't very clear to me. Do you mean 15% of all staked ATOM? As far as I'm aware, a validator does not stake his ATOM to the top 100 nodes, it just stakes them. Feels slightly confusing. Plus we also have to consider delegate stakes to calculate total voting power.

<HighlightBox type="info">
For a deeper dive, visit:

Podcast on consensus systems with Ethan Buchman: https://softwareengineeringdaily.com/2018/03/26/consensus-systems-with-ethan-buchman/
Tendermint BFT engine is connected to the application by a socket protocol called the Application Blockchain Interface (ABCI).
Tendermint ecosystem: https://tendermint.com/core/#ecosystem
</HighlightBox>

## Application Blockchain Interface

There are at least two broad **approaches to application-level concerns** using blockchains. One way is to create a purpose-built blockchain where everything that can be done is defined in the protocol. The other method is to create a programmable state machine and push application concerns to a higher level, such as bytecode created by compilers interpreting higher-level languages. Ethereum-like blockchains are part of the second category. Only the state machine is defined in the on-chain protocol, which defines the rules of contract creation, interaction, and execution and little else.

> This method is not without its limitations. First, very little is universally defined. Standards for basic concerns such as tokens emerge organically through voluntary participation. Second, contracts can and do contain repetitive code that may or may not correctly implement the developer’s intentions. Third, the inherent flexibility of it makes it challenging to reason about what is correct or even what is friendly. Finally, there are practical limits to the complexity of operations that are very low as compared to what is possible in other settings.Those limits make it especially difficult to perform analysis or reorganize data, and developers are forced to adapt to the constraints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is not without its limitations. First, very little is universally defined. Standards for basic concerns such as tokens emerge organically through voluntary participation. Second, contracts can and do contain repetitive code that may or may not correctly implement the developer’s intentions. Third, the inherent flexibility of it makes it challenging to reason about what is correct or even what is friendly. Finally, there are practical limits to the complexity of operations that are very low as compared to what is possible in other settings. Those limits make it especially difficult to perform analysis or reorganize data, and developers are forced to adapt to the constraints.
```

Missing space

Developers create the Application Layer using the **Cosmos SDK**. The Cosmos SDK provides both a scaffold to get started and a rich set of modules that address common concerns. The Cosmos SDK provides a head start and a framework for getting started as well as a rich set of modules that address common concerns such as governance, tokens, other standards, and interactions with other blockchains through the Inter-Blockchain Protocol (IBC). Creation of a purpose-built blockchain with Cosmos SDK is largely a process of selecting, configuring, and integrating well-solved modules, also known as composing modules. This greatly reduces the scope of original development required since development is focused mostly on the truly novel aspects of the application.

<HighlightBox type="info">

> Later, we will dive into the Inter-Blockchain Protocol (IBC). **IBC** is a common framework for exchanging information between blockchains built with Cosmos. For now, it is enough to know that it exists and it enables seamless interaction between blockchains that want to exchange information, such as tokens. In summary, this enables communication between applications that run on separate purpose-built blockchains.

Reviewer: IBC is also used to connect to non-Cosmos chains, although a Cosmos bridge will necessarily need to be built.

![state machine](./images/state_machine_2.png)

Developers create the state machine using the Cosmos SDK. This includes storage organization, also known as the state, and the state transaction functions which determine what is permissible and what, if any, adjustments to the state result from each kind of transaction.

In this context, “consensus” establishes a canonical set of well-ordered blocks that contain well-ordered transactions. The chain of blocks is therefore a well-ordered set of all finalized transactions and all nodes agree that the canonical set is the only relevant set. Since the state machine defined by the developers is deterministic, there is only one correct interpretation of the canonical transaction set and, by extension, only one correct determination of the state machine when any given transaction is executed or at any block height.

> This state machine definition is silent on the processes that confirm and propagate transactions, and Tendermint is agnostic about the meaning of the blocks it organizes.The Tendermint consensus establishes the ordered set of transactions. By extension, the nodes reach consensus about the state of the application.

Reviewer 2: We still need the space between the punctuation mark and "The"

> ![ABCI](./images/ABCI_2.png)

Reviewer: Although great, I'm wondering if this section is necessary in this already very dense chapter. If the end goal is understanding the Long-running Exercise, I'm not entirely sure if this level of abstraction is required. Perhaps this could be an expansion panel instead?

When blocks are received, Tendermint calls the `DeliverTx` method to pass the information to the application layer for interpretation and possible state machine transition.

Additionally, `BeginBlock` and `EndBlock` messages are broadcast even if blocks contain no transactions. This provides positive confirmation of basic connectivity and no operation time periods. These methods facilitate the execution of scheduled processes that should run in any case because they call methods at the application level where developers can define processes. It is wise to be cautious about adding too much computational weight at the start or completion of each block since the blocks arrive at approximately one-second intervals and too much work could slow down your blockchain.

> Any application that uses Tendermint for consensus must implement the Application Blockchain Interface. Fortunately, you do not have to because the Cosmos SDK provides a boilerplate known as the BaseApp to get you started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any application that uses Tendermint for consensus must implement the Application Blockchain Interface. Fortunately, you do not have to do this manually because the Cosmos SDK provides a boilerplate known as the BaseApp to get you started.
```
Suggestion for clarity.

When we return to this long running exercise, in the next chapters, the goal is to improve it and use the Cosmos SDK as we learn elements.

As you can imagine, beyond the rules of the game, there is a lot we need to take care of. Therefore, as a start we ought to simplify to the maximum. Have a look at these [specs](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/c939e15/spec/abci/abci.md) to see what the application needs to do to comply with ABCI, and try to figure out how barebones you would make your first, imperfect, checkers game blockchain.

### “Make” the state machine

Here is how we would do it. We _would_ do it, because we are here to learn the Cosmos SDK primarily, not to become proficient at implementing ABCI.

> We want to show the minimum viable ABCI state machine. Tendermint does not concern itself with whether proposed transactions are valid, and about how the state changes after such a transaction. It delegates those to the state machine, which will _transform_ transactions into game moves and states.

Reviewer: Perhaps we can kick this off with a flow-diagram to give an overview to a relatively heavy section?

In case the header has omitted the `AppHash`, which should never happen, the application should work off the last state it has arrived at.

With this state loaded, the application is ready to respond to the upcoming `CheckTx` and `DeliverTx`.

#### `CheckTx`: a new transaction appears in the transaction pool

That's where Tendermint [asks](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/c939e15/spec/abci/abci.md#checktx) our application whether the transaction is worth keeping at all. Because we want to simplify to the maximum, we only concern ourselves with whether there is a valid move in the transaction.

For that, we check whether there are 4 `int` in the serialized information. We can also check that the `int` themselves are within the boundaries of the board, i.e. between `0` and `7`.

It is better _not_ to check whether we have a [valid move](https://github.com/batkinson/checkers-go/blob/a09daeb/checkers/checkers.go#L168):

> `func (game *Game) ValidMove(src, dst Pos) bool`

> As a transaction may contain a move that is valid only when actually delivered, for instance if it needs another move to take place before it.

Reviewer: This was unclear to me when I read it the first time, especially in the context of checkers, because at this stage of the exercise you’d probably expect only 1 move to occur per block and so it wouldn’t be entirely clear why another move might take place before it or why we would have to wait for anything.

Feels to me this is also related to efficiency as we don't want to perform a full check on every transaction in the mempool? (right?)
